.. role:: pkg(literal)
.. role:: hs(literal)
.. role:: mod(literal)
.. role:: repo(literal)

.. default-role:: hs

.. contents::

Introduction
============

The system diagrams uses for constructing paths can seem overly
complex at first---there are many different types involved, and a
plethora of ways to convert between them.  However, it is the result
of deep thought and careful design---that's not to say it is perfect,
but for the most part, things are the way they are for a reason. The
concept of a "path" has quite a few inherent subtleties!

The goal of this tutorial, therefore, is to give you proficiency in
working with trails and paths via practice on numerous
exercises. This tutorial is not intended to be a comprehensive
reference; for that, consult the `user manual`_.  As a prerequisite,
you should already be familiar with the material in the `tutorial on
vectors and points`__.

.. _`user manual`: manual.html#trails-and-paths
__ vector.html

Segments
========

The basic building block of diagrams paths is the *segment*.  For the
purposes of this tutorial, however, it is enough to know that a
segment can be either a straight line segment or a (cubic BÃ©zier)
curve, and that the lines, loops, trails, and paths we will meet in
the following sections are all built out of segments.  Typically, in
creating diagrams, one does not need to work directly with
segments. Consult the `user manual`__ if you wish to know more about
them.

__ manual.html#segments

Lines
=====

The first foundational concept to understand is that of a *line*,
which is a *translation-invariant path through space*, consisting of a
sequence of segments end-to-end. Note that a line can be arbitrarily kinked and
curved. Think not of a "straight line", but rather of a "train line"
or a "subway line".

A line is a kind of *trail* (we will meet the other kind in the
following section), and has type `Trail' Line v` for some vector type
`v` (typically `V2 Double`).

Constructing lines
------------------

Lines are an instance of the `TrailLike` class, so to construct a
line, you can use any function with a return type like `TrailLike t =>
... -> t`. Examples of such functions include `fromOffsets`,
`fromVertices`, `fromSegments`, `(~~)`, `circle`, `arc`, `triangle`,
`square`, `pentagon`, `rect`, `roundedRect`, `polygon`, `arc`, and
`cubicSpline`, among many others (click a function name to see its
type, its documentation, and other nearby functions).

A line can be turned into a diagram with `strokeLine`. Since lines are
*translation-invariant*, they have no definite location in space, and
`strokeLine` must arbitrarily pick a location; by default, the origin
is chosen as the starting location of the line. (Of course, in many
situations this does not matter.)

.. container:: warning

  Lines are never filled, so setting a fill color on a line has no
  effect.  (For things that do get filled, see the next section on
  `Loops`_.)

Below are a series of diagrams that you should attempt to reproduce.
Each exercise lists functions that you may find useful in completing
it.  If you are really stuck or want to check your answers, you can
find the source code for this tutorial on github.

.. container:: exercises

  #. `fromOffsets`

     .. class:: dia

     ::

     > example
     >   = fromOffsets [unitX, 2 *^ unitY, 2 *^ unitX]
     >   # strokeLine
     >   # centerXY # pad 1.1

  #. `lineOffset`, `direction`

     .. class:: dia

     ::

     > ln :: Trail' Line V2 Double
     > ln    = fromOffsets [unitX, 2 *^ unitY, 2 *^ unitX]
     > theta = angleBetween unitX (lineOffset ln)
     > example
     >   = ln # rotate theta
     >   # strokeLine
     >   # centerXY # pad 1.1

  #. `fromVertices`

     .. class:: dia

     ::

     > pts = [ p2 (x,y) | x <- [0 .. 4], y <- [0, 1] ]
     > example = pts # fromVertices # strokeLine
     >         # centerXY # pad 1.1

  #. `pentagon`

     .. class:: dia

     ::

     > example = pentagon 1 # strokeLine # centerXY # pad 1.1

  #. `pentagon`, `onLineSegments`

     .. class:: dia

     ::

     > example = pentagon 1 # onLineSegments tail # strokeLine
     >         # centerXY # pad 1.1

Composing lines
---------------

A very important feature of lines is that they are an instance of
`Monoid`, with the empty line (containing no segments) as `mempty`,
and concatenation of lines as `mappend` (aka `<>`).

.. container:: exercises

  #. `mappend`

     .. class:: dia

     ::

     > p = pentagon 1 # onLineSegments init
     > example = (p <> p) # strokeLine
     >         # centerXY # pad 1.1

  #. `iterateN`, `rotateBy`, `mconcat`

     .. class:: dia

     ::

     > p = pentagon 1 # onLineSegments init
     > example = iterateN 5 (rotateBy (1/5)) p
     >    # mconcat # strokeLine # centerXY # pad 1.1 # sized (mkWidth 2)

  #. `reverseLine`

     .. class:: dia

     ::

     > hanoi 0 = mempty
     > hanoi n = mconcat
     >   [ h' # rotateBy (-1/3) # reverseLine
     >   , fromOffsets [unitX] # rotateBy (1/6)
     >   , h'
     >   , fromOffsets [unitX] # rotateBy (-1/6)
     >   , h' # rotateBy (1/3) # reverseLine
     >   ]
     >   where h' = hanoi (n-1)
     >
     > example = hanoi 4 # strokeLine
     >   # centerXY # pad 1.1 # sized (mkWidth 2)

Loops
=====

A *loop* is another kind of trail, with type `Trail' Loop v n`.  Loops
are like lines, except for the fact that they are "closed": they end
in the same place where they start, and have an "inside" and an
"outside".

Constructing loops
------------------

Loops are also an instance of `TrailLike`, so many of the same
functions mentioned in the previous section for constructing lines can
also be used to construct loops.

Loops can be turned into diagrams with `strokeLoop`.

.. container:: exercises

  #. `strokeLoop`

     .. class:: dia

     ::

     > example = pentagon 1 # strokeLoop # fc blue # centerXY # pad 1.1

  #. Change `strokeLoop` to `strokeLine` in your solution to the
     previous exercise.  Explain the difference in the output.

Converting between lines and loops
----------------------------------

There are two functions which allow converting a line into a loop.
The first is `glueLine`.  It simply assumes that the line ends in the
same place that it starts, and "glues" the line closed. (If the line
does not end in the same place that it starts, the final segment will
be altered so that it does.)

Note that unlike lines, loops *do not* have a `Monoid` instance.  One
common pattern for constructing complicated loops is to concatenate
some lines and then call `glueLine` on the result.  You try:

.. container:: exercises

  #. `glueLine`

     .. class:: dia

     ::

     > p = pentagon 1 # onLineSegments init
     > example = iterateN 5 (rotateBy (1/5)) p
     >    # mconcat # glueLine # strokeLoop
     >    # fc green # centerXY # pad 1.1 # sized (mkWidth 2)

  #. .. class:: dia

     ::

     > step = fromOffsets [unitY, unitX]
     > steps n = mconcat (replicate n step)
     >        <> step # rotateBy (1/2) # scale (fromIntegral n)
     > example = steps 5 # glueLine # strokeLoop # fc red
     >   # centerXY # pad 1.1 # sized (mkWidth 2)

  #. .. class:: dia

     ::

     > andThen t1 t2 = t1 <> t2 # rotate (angleBetween d1 d2)
     >   where
     >     d1 = tangentAtEnd t1
     >     d2 = tangentAtStart t2
     >
     > str = fromOffsets [unitX]
     > cap = arc xDir (1/2 @@ turn)
     > arm = str `andThen` cap `andThen` str
     >
     > armUnit = arm `andThen` (arc xDir (3/10 @@ turn) # reflectX)
     >
     > example = foldr andThen mempty (replicate 5 armUnit)
     >   # glueLine # strokeLoop # fc blue
     >   # rotateBy (1/20)
     >   # centerXY # pad 1.1 # sized (mkWidth 2)

     You may find this function useful:

     .. class:: lhs

     ::

     > andThen t1 t2 = t1 <> t2 # rotate (d1 ^-^ d2)
     >   where
     >     d1 = direction (tangentAtEnd t1)
     >     d2 = direction (tangentAtStart t2)

The second function for converting from lines to loops, `closeLine`,
adds an extra (linear) segment from the end of the line to the
beginning.

.. container:: exercises

  #. `closeLine`

     .. class:: dia

     ::

     > trap = fromOffsets
     >          [ unitY # rotateBy (-1/15)
     >          , unitX
     >          , unit_Y # rotateBy (1/15)
     >          ]
     >        # closeLine
     > example = trap # strokeLoop # centerXY # pad 1.1

  #. .. class:: dia

     ::

     > s = fromOffsets [unitY # rotateBy (-1/30)]
     > tine = s <> s # reflectX # reverseLine
     > tines = mconcat . replicate 10 $ tine
     > comb = s <> tines <> s # reflectX # reverseLine
     > example = comb # closeLine # strokeLoop # fc yellow
     >   # centerXY # pad 1.1 # sized (mkWidth 2)

Finally, to convert from a loop to a line, use `cutLoop`, which "cuts"
a loop at its shared start/end point, resulting in a line which "just
happens" to end where it starts.  It is harder to come up with
exercises requiring the use of `cutLoop`; in most cases where you
might think of using it, you could simply construct a line in the
first place.  For example,

.. class:: lhs

::

  (square 1 :: Trail' Loop V2 Double) # cutLoop :: Trail' Line V2 Double

is exactly the same as `square 1 :: Trail' Line V2 Double`.  So there
are no exercises here; it's simply useful to be aware that in any
situation where something that is naturally a loop is interpreted as a
line (for example, `square 1 :: Trail' Line V2 Double`), `cutLoop` is being
used under the hood.

Trails
======

We have now seen both types of trails.  The `Trail` type is simply a
wrapper around both lines and loops.  That is, something of type
`Trail v n` is either a line or a loop, wrapped up so the type does not
tell you which it is (though it is possible to recover the information
dynamically, using functions like `withTrail`).  To make a line or
loop into a `Trail`, use `wrapLine` or `wrapLoop`, respectively.  Many
of the functions we have seen on lines and loops have corresponding
versions that operate on `Trail`\s, such as `strokeTrail`, `glueTrail`,
`closeTrail`, `reverseTrail`, and `cutTrail`.

Located
=======

The `Located` wrapper associates a point location with an object,
turning translation-invariant things into located things.

To give a location to something, use `at :: a -> Point (V a) (N a) ->
Located a`.  Located lines, loops, and trails can be turned into
diagrams with `strokeLocLine`, `strokeLocLoop`, and `strokeLocTrail`
respectively.

One reason you may sometimes want to work with `Located` trails is
when using `explodeTrail` to turn a trail into a collection of
`Located` trails, one for each individual segment.  Using `Located` in
this way remembers the locations of the segments relative to one
another.

.. container:: exercises

  #. `explodeTrail`, `mapLoc`

     .. class:: dia

     ::

     > example
     >   = explodeTrail (heptagon 1)
     >   # map (strokeLocTrail . mapLoc (rotateBy (1/20)))
     >   # mconcat
     >   # centerXY # pad 1.1 # sized (mkWidth 2)

  #. .. class:: dia

     ::

     > sqTrail :: Trail' Line V2 Double
     > sqTrail = iterateN 4 (rotateBy (1/4))
     >             (fromOffsets (replicate 4 unitX))
     >           # mconcat
     > example
     >   = sqTrail
     >   # wrapLine # (`at` origin)
     >   # explodeTrail
     >   # map strokeLocTrail
     >   # zipWith lc (cycle [red, blue])
     >   # mconcat
     >   # lwG 0.05
     >   # centerXY # pad 1.1 # sized (mkWidth 2)

Paths
=====

A *path* is simply a collection of located trails.

.. container:: exercises

  #. `star`, `pathTrails`

     .. class:: dia

     ::

     > s :: Path V2 Double
     > s = star (StarSkip 5) (regPoly 30 1)
     >
     > example
     >   = s
     >   # pathTrails
     >   # map strokeLocTrail
     >   # zipWith lc [red,orange,yellow,blue,green,purple]
     >   # mconcat
     >   # lwG 0.03
     >   # centerXY # pad 1.1 # sized (mkWidth 2)

  #. `atPoints`, `fillRule`

     .. class:: dia

     ::

     > innerCircles :: Path V2 Double
     > innerCircles = atPoints (trailVertices $ hexagon 2) (repeat (circle 1)) <> circle 1
     >
     > example = (innerCircles <> circle 3) # stroke # fc blue # fillRule EvenOdd
